Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Colonel Bob Wilkinson caught the end of the Korean War and then three tours of Vietnam, flying both fixed-wing and choppers as a United States Marine.
But some of his most memorable stories come from the 32 weeks that he served as a helicopter pilot for President and Mrs. Dwight Eisenhower.
In those 32 weeks, he was shuttling them, mostly from the White House to the retreat, named after their grandson.
That was Camp David.
His is a fascinating 28-year career of military service.
And we welcome Bobby Wilkinson of Bryan to Veterans of the Valley.
You were actually three years, I know, flying former President Eisenhower, but 32 weeks at Camp David.
And we're going to talk about that a little bit later on, but let's go.
Bob, early in your career, 1949, you actually got into the service right out of high school.
And sort of tell us what happened right then.
You almost got fired real quick from the Marine Corps, right?
Well, went into the service right out of high school, went to boot camp, and then from boot camp straight to flight training.
I was in flight training and just finished pre-flight instruction at Pensacola, Florida.
And on a Friday afternoon, they called us into the gymnasium and told us that
due to the shortage of funds, we're going to wash three fourths of you out.
Sunday morning, the Korean War broke out.
So Monday morning before breakfast, they called us all back in and said, forget that lecture, get back to work.
Exactly.
A lot of people don't know it, but when Korea broke out, a lot of the troops, the funds had been depleted still from World War II.
There wasn't a lot left as far as being able to fight that war, but then it got back.
So
Talk about what happened after that day.
You got real busy and eventually you did serve in Korea.
Yes.
That day I went through basic flight training at Pensacola and then advanced Corpus Christi and was ordered to Cherry Point, North Carolina.
And they pulled two brand new second lieutenants and decided they want to send us through night fighter training, all weather fighter training.
And it took me a little longer to get through that training than a regular training.
And I didn't get to Korea until right at the end of the Korean War, but I served a complete tour in Korea of 15 months.
1953, I think you said you went to Korea, so four years after you had enlisted.
Talk about the planes that you flew, the fixed plane planes.
Well, first, in Cherry Point, I was checked out in the F-7F, which was a
Hangover, you might say, from World War II, it was used as night interdictory with rockets, bombs, and napalms, and was very good in that capacity.
And we used that to intercept trucks, and the other transportation north of Vietnam was they had brought down supplies at night.
Also, we trained during that time in a fighter intercept in the first night fighter that was jet in the Marine Corps, the F3D.
We used that to escort the B-29s because we had about four and a half hours of fuel and could stay airborne quite a time.
How long was your Korean tour?
15 months.
And talk a little bit about what the job, you described a little bit about what the job was, but sort of talk a little bit about those 15 months.
I guess there were some pretty interesting times in the air.
Yes, there was.
As a young pilot, you gotta experience faster or the consequences.
The night interdictory work was a little hairy, especially when the weather got bad.
And the weather was bad over there in the summertime because you'd get the monsoons.
And the jet flying was a little better.
You could get up on top most of the time and fly around up there.
The only time we had any action with the jets was on moonlit nights when the MiGs would come down, and we were slower in the MiGs, but once we'd start turning, the MiGs didn't seem to have any radar, and we could be on their tail pretty fast, so they'd usually get out of that area.
The squadron was a pretty
high morale squadron because there were five people in the squadron that had MIG kills.
And it was a good bunch of people.
The only thing is only two of us young lieutenants, all the rest were World War II vets.
And they kind of watched what missions they put us on and kind of
really shepherd us around to make sure we didn't get in harm's way.
I see.
Which you appreciated.
I did.
And the training was very good.
Your tour of Korea done, you really had a whole separate career between Korea and your first tour of Vietnam.
Sort of take us from there.
You eventually came back to Texas B-Ville as an instructor, right?
Yes, I ordered back to B-Ville as a
instructor for three years in advanced training command.
Upon completion of that, the Marine Corps decided to send 60% of the aviators into helicopters because that was the coming thing.
And I received orders to Pensacola and retrained in helicopters and reported to the West Coast.
And I'd been on the West Coast about a year and I was on maneuvers in the Philippines and all of a sudden I get orders to report to Washington, D.C.
And immediately, and also during my time and route, I was supposed to work up so I could get clearance for a White House clearance.
So I knew that something was up.
And we'd heard rumors that they were going to start a program to fly the president by helicopters.
And that's when I reported into Quantico, which is where we were based at.
and we'd fly from there up the river.
Ike had a very strict schedule.
You could set your watch on his timing.
We would go in to pick him up.
If we had a set time to pick him up at the White House, we could be 21 seconds early or three seconds late.
And he had heard that real well.
And on the first 32 weekends that I was at Quantico, I would go up on a Friday afternoon, pick the President and Miz and Eisenhower up on a Friday and take them up to Camp David and stay up there for the weekend.
They were always scheduled to fly back on a Sunday afternoon, but it would never happen.
Right.
Mamie didn't like to fly, but she'd fly to get out of Washington.
But when it come time for her to return to Washington, usually on a Sunday afternoon she would call us and apologize to the fact that she was going to stay over until Monday morning and the President would too, and we were flying back at 7 o'clock.
in the morning on Monday morning.
And then she would always invite us down to have dinner with her and the president.
Right.
And the cabin they live down at Camp David, which was called Aspen.
Yes, sir.
And very nice meal.
And we all always had all 15 members of our crews.
We had five helicopters up there.
And after the dinner.
They would make sure we stayed for the movie.
Hollywood knew that Eisenhower enjoyed Western movies, so they flew the latest Western movies out to him, right?
And we had a big L-shaped room off the dining room, and at the back of the room was three couches and a table and a 35-millimeter projector on top of it.
And out in the middle of the room, there would be one chair, one chair only.
That's where Ike sat.
Yes, sir.
And at the other end was a pull-down screen.
So we'd get up from the table.
And when we got up from the dining room table, Mamie would make sure she had grabbed one of us by one arm and one by the other and set us down on the couch so she'd have a person on each side to talk to.
And during the movie, she didn't ever watch the movie at all.
She'd be talking.
And every once in a while, it usually happened about three times during the movie, the president would turn over his shoulder and say, Mamie,
Hush, I can't hear the movie.
Just like regular folks, right?
Just like regular folks.
And that happened for the 32 straight weekends.
And to be honest with you, I've never seen the same movie twice.
There's always...
And these were back in the days when they didn't have videos and things like that.
16 millimeter projectors set up in the middle of the room.
35 millimeter.
Yes.
That's right.
Shouldn't be surprising that he was such a stickler for being on time and punctual.
I mean, this was a general who had who had pulled off the Normandy invasion.
So it's probably not surprising at all that a military man would be like that.
On one occasion, I went in to pick him up.
I was supposed to pick up his secretary of state, John Foster Dallas, who was crippled.
And he come out right at 10 o'clock, got in the helicopter, and his secretary of state wasn't with him, and I was waiting before I lifted for him to come out.
And I get word from the president, why haven't you lifted?
And I sent word back down, well, your secretary of state was supposed to come.
He says he knew he wanted to be here to lift.
So about the time I left it, here comes Secretary of the State out of the back door and I had to send another helicopter back to pick him up.
So he didn't play favorites when he meant to be on time.
You told me the President Eisenhower was a nice gentleman, but you certainly didn't want to get on his wrong side if you worked for him, right?
Well, that's right.
He had a knack for chewing people out, but he never chewed people out in public.
or around any ladies or the press.
It was always in private.
But the minute you got chewed out, he'd put his arm around you and wink at you and walk away.
Right.
Like you said, one time you sort of got a deflection of that when something involving his grandson, I guess, right?
Well, yeah, we were supposed to pick his son up.
We picked him up at the Burning Tree Golf Course.
He was playing golf there, and we picked him up at the AEC helicopter pad.
And we, a naval aide forgot to tell us to pick up his son at the White House, who had a bunch of papers.
So when we got up to Camp David, he was a little irked.
And he started chewing out the naval aide, and I got caught right in between him and the naval aide.
But after he chewed out, then he'd wink at you, right?
Yeah, he'd put your arm around you and wink at you and walk away.
Now, I want you to tell another story.
This is quite a humorous story.
Besides going to Camp David, he also had a home, I think, which eventually was a retirement home for him up in Newport, Newport, Rhode Island.
And you told a story one time involving cars.
Yes.
What happened with this?
I was in the first group as they formed the presidential missions.
So we kind of had to set up everything with the Secret Service, of course, in conjunction with the press secretary.
And his first summer vacation in Rhode Island, Newport, Rhode Island, we kept our helicopters at Quonset Point, Rhode Island Naval Air Station.
We had a nice place to keep them, and the security was good, but the flight line
Uh, and they kept us, uh, we had boards, build it over to BOQ and enlisted quarters, but we had, there's a river between us and the flight line.
So we had to go down about three miles, go over a bridge and get to our flight line if we were at the BOQ or vice versa.
Well, we were always
worried about being there on time because he was such a stickler for time.
And the first day, we just barely made a couple of schedules.
So we decided that night, the pilots that were there, that we would try to do something on our own.
So we all pitched in 50 bucks and told one of the pilots to go in town buy a car so we could have transportation instead of relying on the station buses to do it.
So this gentleman went into town.
We told him, we didn't care how he looked, just as long as it was good transportation.
Well, it was good transportation.
It was a 1937 Pontiac Hearst.
And run real good.
But that went on for about two days until the press got a hold of it.
The fact that the presidential pilots were driving around in a hearse.
Quadrant commander come in and told us to get rid of that hearse.
And I think eventually you said a car dealer.
Yeah, the next morning we were in the BOQ mess having breakfast and a nice gentleman walked in dressed to kill and he had something in his hands.
I didn't notice it until he put it down on the table in front of us and it was eight sets of keys.
This gentleman owned a local Ford Motor Company and the Ford Motor Company in Detroit had given us
eight Mercury's to drive while we were in Rhode Island.
So you got out of the Hearst and you had some Mercury's.
That Hearst done its job.
That was good.
We could spend a whole show just talking about your experiences with President and Mrs. Eisenhower, but we've got three tours of Vietnam to talk about.
But before we do that, I want to go to some photographs that you've supplied us.
These are photographs that hang in your home.
And Brian, we can go to those, I believe.
The first one is just about to come up.
You can look right there and you can see this was the F7F, is that right?
Yes, sure.
That was the F7F.
I flew at Cherry Point and a little bit in Korea.
And again, that was sort of an offshoot of the plane F-4F, F-6F that had been used in World War II.
Yes, manufactured by German aircraft.
Right.
And I think you said originally that was a single-seater, but then they put in a second seat, right?
Second seat and put radar in the nose.
I think it was originally built as a photo plane, as a single-seater.
And it was very fast for a propeller-driven airplane.
And you were trained in three different kinds of helicopters.
Which one are we looking at there?
We're looking at the H-34.
That's the one that I was trained in primarily, and I flew the President in a plushed-up version of that.
I see.
So that would have been what Marine One would have been.
Marine One at the time.
That's right.
But you also flew out 53s, 46s, and the Huey gunships.
53, 46s, and the Huey gunships, and had a little time in the Cobra.
I see.
Okay, we'll move on to the next picture.
You're on the right.
Tell us about this picture.
Yes, that was up on my retirement.
The gentleman to my left was
Major General Vic Armstrong.
At the time, I was a presidential pilot.
He was the CEO of the squadron as a lieutenant colonel.
He was very fluent in many foreign languages, also.
And I believe we have another picture here, too.
OK, yeah, this is your shadow box of your awards.
Yes, sir.
Without going through all of them, obviously, you were well decorated.
In the middle, is that the Distinguished Flying Cross?
Yes, sir, it is.
When the Distinguished Flying Cross?
I received that for actions in Vietnam, pulling a long-range recon team out from behind the Middle Islands.
I know that's something you're very proud of, and that hangs on your wall, too.
And thanks for loaning it out to us so we could show everybody else.
Well, also, if we can, when we have a chance, we brought a picture here in the studio, as a matter of fact.
And I'll straighten it out as I'm holding this.
This was a drawing.
I'm going to let you, obviously, the figure in the middle is former President Eisenhower.
Talk about this drawing.
Well, that drawing was made by one of our pilots, a gentleman by the name of Al Leahy.
who'd become very famous as a combat artist later on in Vietnam.
And it was given, the large drawing of that was given to President Eisner after he completed his round the world tour in 1959, 1960.
And those are the several places that he visited.
Now the signatures on the bottom, who is that?
Al Lahey.
Okay, but there's a lot of signatures down there.
Oh, the signatures are all the pilots that were in the squadron.
Okay, so your signature is one of those?
Yes.
At the time, that was about when the squadron was the largest, when I was in it, and we had 34 pilots.
Now the presidential squadron has 85 pilots in it.
Wow.
So it has grown.
It has grown.
You had taken an initial tour of Vietnam and an advisory role, right?
That was your first tour of Vietnam.
Talk briefly about that and then just sort of take us through to you.
Well, I was on a naval amphibious staff and we were an amphibious group primarily offshore in Vietnam, both of them by the DMC and then farther down south by Saigon.
That was an interesting tour.
We could see it coming.
Right.
But we couldn't do much about it until other things happened.
And that was in 1963.
Right.
And then 1965, I guess, when Vietnam was starting to get full blown, that was your second tour.
That was my second tour.
I was in a squadron.
In fact, I was squadron commander of a helicopter squadron in Hawaii.
And I was one of the first squadrons they sent to Vietnam and had my first tour over there at the time.
Why don't you talk more about that tour?
One of the ways that I got to know Colonel Wilkinson is that you're a member of an organization here in town called BSA, which stands for Ben Shot At.
And these are veterans who
quite simply have been shot at in warfare.
And you sort of earned your membership into this group in that second tour of Vietnam initially.
Some pretty, as you say, pretty hairy rides there, I guess.
Yes, sir.
I was one of the very few squadrons or few members of the squadrons that went over there that had combat experience from the Korean War.
So they kind of looked for me as leadership and a
I'd been there a short time, and a group commander called me and said, okay, you're going to lead the three and a half squadrons in the next day's operations, which was a pretty hairy one up in the Aishau Valley on the river.
And we took quite a bit of fire.
We really didn't get anybody, and our squadron hurt, but we were dropping out.
south vietnamese troops and uh we had several wounded troops we had to go back in and pull out yes sir yes that was the first baptism in south vietnam with me right it was taking heavy fire right now you were a uh a commanding officer and you actually uh sort of jumped over some lieutenant colonels at the at the time when you were a commanding officer is that right yes sir
Yes, sir.
I had my first command as a major.
I see.
And we had quite a few lieutenant colonels that kind of looked at me.
Right.
But I was in the right place at the right time, and the commanding general said, you're it.
And so I carried out my orders.
You had gone back.
One thing we passed over is actually before you went to Vietnam, I guess, for your second tour, you had gotten orders as a
with the helicopter squadron in Hawaii, is that right?
And then after your second tour, you had gone back to Hawaii, is that correct?
Sort of take us from there.
Well, when I was through my tour in 1965, I was ordered back to Hawaii and I spent three years back there and we reorganized a brigade and the first was the brigade G4 and then become the G3, the operations officer.
And then upon completion of that three-year tour,
went back to the West Coast for three months and retrained.
And every helicopter I could get retrained in, so when I reported to Vietnam, I could get a squadron right away.
Right.
And I was trained in the 53, the 46, and the Huey.
Exactly.
So I ended up getting a Huey gunship squadron.
Right.
And I guess if I'm getting the chronology of this right, was your third tour of Vietnam that you were a...
A commander of a maintenance squadron, is that right?
The first three months, I was commander of an aircraft group maintenance squadron.
Right.
And then I was ordered to take over a gunship squadron for my last nine months.
Exactly.
And so that was a nine-month tour of something that's normally a six-month tour.
Well, it's normally a six-month tour of squadron commander, and they kept me in there for nine months.
I see.
And this was all happening actually, what, south of the DMZ?
Well, I was supposed to.
My squadron had a particular mission that was called the Prairie Fire Mission.
We had to furnish two helicopters, and they were the lead-in helicopters every day.
So I had two crews constantly were on that mission.
And it was a very hairy mission because we were putting long-range recon teams in.
behind enemy lines over in Laos and North Vietnam.
So we were getting shot up pretty often.
And I got quite a few aircraft shot up, but only lost one crew or half of one crew.
And the only way that the two out of the four survived was when they got hit so bad they hit in a river.
They was on fire and they hit in a river and survived it because of that.
You talked about people that were under your command.
You had a couple of majors, a captain, some lieutenants, and it's very important that you talked to me with a lot of pride about how those people turned out and who they became.
Yes, sir.
Talk about that.
When my last tour in Vietnam with that squadron, I had three majors, one captain, and the rest were lieutenants right out of flight school.
Right.
Three of these lieutenants made general officer.
One of them made two-star, one made three, and one become assistant commandant of the Marine Corps as a four-star.
And I was very proud of those young men.
They were put under fire right away as young officers and come through very nicely there.
And then later on,
They continued their career and had a brilliant career.
Right.
And one of them who become assistant commandant had a story about because he called me aside one morning and said, something's wrong with me.
I'm scared to death on that prairie fire mission.
So I just looked him in the face about 45 seconds and didn't say a word.
And then finally I said, Willie, so am I. And he was so happy somebody else was
I thought he was going to jump across the desk and kiss me.
He wasn't aware that other people were scared too.
Even his leader felt the same way that he did.
And you knew after that you were going to have no more problems.
No problem with him.
Exactly.
Your tour of Vietnam over.
We didn't talk about your education.
You kind of got education when you could during your military career.
You eventually got your initial degree at Chaminade when you were in Hawaii and then came to Texas A&M and did some work in accounting here.
Is that right?
Yeah, graduate work in accounting.
But I basically got three years of my first college.
I think I attended every college on both coasts to get different courses at night.
to where I worked up to three years and the Marine Corps sent me the year and a half to complete my college education.
And then at three and a half years, I was able to get a double major in both history and political science in the Far East.
Right, right.
And you opened up your own accounting company here and that's what you did for a living, right?
Yes.
After I retired in 77, I had a little accounting firm that I
Most of my clients were professional men, doctors, dentists, and vets.
You and your wife, Janet, she's a retired RN.
I know that.
And I know you have a family, daughters and grandchildren.
And one of your grandchildren is serving in Iraq right now.
We've got about just a few seconds left.
I know you're very proud of that.
Yes, I am.
My oldest daughter is a professor at Mississippi State.
And my youngest daughter's husband is a retired Army.
And my grandson chose Marine Corps.
And I'm proud of that.
And he's now serving in Vietnam.
Very proud of the family.
I bet you are.
And we're very proud of you.
And I wish we had more time because we could talk a lot about it.
Quite a fascinating career.
Thank you, Bob Wilkinson, for being with us today.
My privilege, sir.
All right.
Bob Wilkinson and his wife, Janet, have been married 53 years.
They live in their deserved retirement in Bryan.
He's a proud member of this local group we told you about, BSA.
That stands for Ben Shot At, and he earned that description many times in Vietnam while defending our freedoms.
We salute Colonel Bob Wilkinson for his service, as we salute all veterans.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Please join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.